CHAPTER VIII - The Yoga of the Indestructible Brahma

1 Arjuna said: ‘‘Krsna, what is that Brahma (Absolute), what is Adhyatma (Spirit), and what is Karma (Action)? What is called Adhibhuta (Matter) and what is termed as Adhidaiva (Divine Intel-ligence)?
2 Krsna, who is Adhiyajna here and how does he dwell in the body? And how are You to be realized at the time of death by those of self controlled mind? ’’
3 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘The supreme Indestructible is Brahma; one's own self (the individual soul) is called Adhyatma; and the dis-charge of spirits (Visarga - sacrifice), which brings forth the exist-ence of beings, is called Karma (Action).
4 All perishable objects are Adhibhuta; the shining Purusa(Brahma) is Adhidaiva; and in this body I Myself, dwelling as the inner witness, and  Adhiyajna, O Arjuna!
5 He who departs from the body, thinking of Me alone even at the time of death, attains My state; there is no doubt about it.
6 Arjuna, thinking of whatever entity, one leaves the body at the time of death, that and that alone one attains, being ever ab-sorbed in its thought.
7 Therefore, Arjuna, think of Me at all times and fight. With mind and reason thus set on Me, you will doubtless come to Me.
8 Arjuna, he who with his mind disciplined through Yoga in the form of practice of meditation and thinking of nothing else, isconstantly engaged in contemplation of God attains the supremely effulgent Divine Purusa (God).
9 He who contemplates on the all-wise, ageless Being, the Ruler of all, subtler than the subtle, the universal sustainer, possess-ing a form beyond human conception, refulgent like the sun and far beyond the darkness of ignorance.
10 Having by the power of Yoga firmly held the life-breath in the space between the two eyebrows even at the time of death, and then contemplating on God with a steadfast mind, full of devotion, he reaches verily that supreme divine Purusa (God).
11 I shall tell you briefly about the Supreme goal (viz., God, who is an embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss), which the knowers of the Veda term as the Indestructible; which striving re-cluses free from passion enter, and desiring which the celibates prac-tise Brahmacharya.
12 -13 Having closed all the doors of the senses, and firmly holding the mind in the cavity of the heart, and then fixing the life - breath in the head, and thus remaining steadfast in Yogic concentration on God, he who leaves the body and departs uttering the one indestruc-tible Brahma, OM, and dwelling on Me in My absolute aspect, reaches supreme goal.
14 Arjuna, whosoever always and constantly thinks of Me with undivided mind, to that Yogi ever absorbed in Me I am easily attain-able.
15 Great souls, who have attained the highest perfection, having come to Me, are no more subjected to rebirth, which is the abode of sorrow and is transient by nature.
16 Arjuna, all the worlds from Brahmaloka (the heavenly realm of the Creator, Brahma) downwards are liable to appear and reap-pear. But, O son of Kunti, on attaining Me there is no rebirth. (For while I am beyond Time, regions like Brahmaloka, being conditioned by time, are transitory.)
17 Those Yogis who know from realization Brahma's day as covering a thousand yugas, and so his night as extending to another thousand yugas, know the reality about Time.
18 All embodied being as emanate from the Unmanifest (i.e.,Brahma's subtle body) at the coming of the Brahma's day; at the Brahma's night fall they merge into the Unmanifest.
19 Arjuna, this multitude of beings, being born again and again, is dissolved under compulsion of its nature at the coming of the cosmic night, and helplessly rises again at the commencement of the cosmic day.
20 Far beyond even this unmanifest, there is yet another unmanifest Existence, that Supreme Divine Person, who does not
perish even though all beings perish.
21 The same unmanifest which has been spoken of as the In-destructible is also called the supreme Goal; that again is My su-preme Abode, attaining which they return not to this mortal world.
22 Arjuna, that eternal unmanifest supreme Purusa in whom all beings reside, and by whom all this is pervaded, is attainable only through exclusive Devotion.
23 Arjuna, I shall now tell you the time (path) of departing when Yogis do not return, and also the time (path) of departing when they do return.
24 (Of the two paths) the one is that in which are stationed the all-effulgent fire - god and the deities presiding over daylight, the bright fortnight, and the six months of the northwars course of the sun respectively; proceeding along it after death Yogis, who have known Brahma, being successively led by the above gods, finally reach Brahma. 
25 The other path is that wherein are stationed the gods presiding over smoke, night, the dark fortnight, and the six months of the southward course of the sun; the Yogi (devoted to action with an interested motive) taking to this path after death is led by the above gods, one after another, had attaining the lustre of the moon(and enjoying the fruit of his meritorious deeds in heaven) returns to this mortal world.
26 For these two paths of the world, the bright and the dark,are considered to be eternal. Proceeding by one of them, one reaches the supreme state from which there is no return; and proceeding by the other, one returns to the mortal world, i.e., becomes subject to birth and death once more.
27 Knowing thus the secret of these two paths, O son of Kunti, no Yogi gets deluded. Therefore, Arjuna, at all times be steadfast in yoga in the form of equanimity (i.e., strive constantly for My realization).
28 The Yogi, realizing this profound truth, doubtless transcends all the rewards, ascribed in the scriptures, to the study of the Vedas, as well as to the performance of sacrifices, austerities and charities, and attains the beginningless supreme state.’’
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the 
Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the eighth chapter entitled “The Yoga of the Inde-structible Brahma.”
