CHAPTER IV - The Yoga of knowledge as well as the disciplines of Action and Knowledge

1 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘I taught this immortal Yoga to Vivaswan; Vivaswan conveyed it to Manu; and Manu imparted it to Ikswaku.
2 Thus transmitted in succession from father to son, Arjuna, this Yoga remained known to the Rajarsis (royal sages). It has, how-ever, long since disappeared from this earth.
3 The same ancient yoga has this day been imparted to you by Me, because you are My devotee and friend; and also because this is a supreme secret.’’
4 Arjuna said: ‘‘You are of recent origin, while the birth of Vivaswan date back to remote antiquity. How, then, am I to believe that you taught this Yoga at the beginning of creation? ’’
5 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘Arjuna, you and I have passed through many births, I remember them all; you do not remember, O chastiser of foes.
6 Though birthless and deathless, and the Lord of all beings, I manifest Myself through My own Yogamaya (divine potency), keep-ing My nature (Prakrti) under control.
7 Arjuna, whenever righteousness is on the decline, theunrighteousness is in the ascendant, then I body Myself forth.
8 For the protection of the virtuous, for the extirpation of evil doers, and for establishing Dharma on a firm footing, I am born from age to age.
9 Arjuna, My birth and activities are divine. He who knows this in reality is not reborn on leaving his body, but come to Me.
10 Completely rid of passion, fear and anger, wholly absorbed in Me, depending on Me, and purified by the penance of wisdom, many have become one with me even in the past.
11 Arjuna, howsoever men approach Me; even so do I reward them; for all men follow my path in every way.
12 In this world of human beings, men seeking the fruition of their activities worship the gods; for success born of actions follows quickly.
13 The four orders of society (viz, the Brahman, the Ksatriya, the Vaisya and the Sudra) were created by Me classifying them ac-cording to the mode of Prakrti predominant in each and apportion-ing corresponding duties to them; though the author of this creation, know Me, the immortal Lord, to be a non-doer.
14 Since I have no craving for the fruit of actions, actions do not contaminate Me. Even he who thus knows Me in reality is not bound by actions.
15 Having known thus, action was performed even by the ancient seekers for liberation; therefore, do you also perform such actions as have been performed by the ancients from the beginning of time.
16 What is action? And what is inaction? Even men of intelli-gence are puzzled over this question. Therefore, I shall expound to you the truth about action, knowing which you will be freed from its evil effect (binding nature).
17 The truth about action must be known and the truth of in-action also must be known; even so the truth about prohibited action must be known. For mysterious are the ways of action.
18 He who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is wise among men; he is a yogi, who has performed all actions.
19 Even the wise call him a sage, whose undertakings are all free from desire and thoughts of the world, and whose actions are burnt up by the fire of wisdom.
20 He who, having totally given up attachment to actions and their fruit, no longer depends on the world, and is ever satisfied, does nothing at all, though fully engaged in action.
21 Having subdued his mind and body, and given up all objects of enjoyment, and free from craving, he who performs sheer bodily action does not incur sin.
22 The Karmayogi, who is contented with whatever is got unsought, is free from jealousy and has transcended all pairs of opposites (like joy and grief), and is balanced in success and failure, is not bound by his action.
23 All the actions of the one who is free from attachment, who has no identification with the body and does not claim it as his own, whose mind is established in the wisdom (Gnana) and who works merely for the sake of sacrifice is entirely dissolved.
24 In the practice of seeing Brahma everywhere as a form of sacrifice Brahma is the ladle (with which the oblation is poured into the fire, etc.,) Brahma, again, is the oblation; Brahma is the fire, Brahma itself is the sacrificer, and so Brahma itself constitutes the act of pouring the oblation into the fire. And finally Brahma is the goal to be reached by him who is absorbed in Brahma as the act of such sacrifice.
25 Other Yogis duly offer sacrifice only in the form of worship to gods. Other pour into the fire of Brahma the very sacrifice in the form of the self (Soul) through the sacrifice known as the perception of identity.
26 Others offers as sacrifice their senses of hearing etc. into the fires of self-discipline. Other yogis, again, offer sound and other objects of perception into the fires of the senses.
27 Others sacrifice all the functions of their senses and the functions of the vital airs into the fire of Yoga in the shape of self-control, kindled by wisdom.
28 Some perform sacrifice with material possessions; some offer sacrifice in the shape of austerities; others sacrifice through the practice of Yoga; while some striving souls, observing austere vows, perform sacrifice in the shape of wisdom through the study of sacred texts.
29 - 30 Other Yogis offer the act of exhalation into that of inhala-tion; even so others, the act of inhalation into that of exhalation. There are still others given to the practice of Pranayama (breath-control), who having regulated their diet and controlled the processes of exhalation and inhalation both pour their vital airs into the vital air themselves. All these have their sins consumed away by sacri-fice and understand the meaning of sacrificial worship.
31 Arjuna, Yogis who enjoy the nectar that has been left over after the performance of a sacrifice attain the eternal Brahma. To the man who does not offer sacrifice, even this world is not happy; how, then, can the other world be happy?
32 Many such forms of sacrifice have been set forth in detail through the mouth of Vedas; know them all as involving the action (of mind, senses and body). Thus knowing the truth about them you shall be freed from the bondage of action (through their performance).
33 Arjuna, sacrifice through wisdom is superior to sacrifice performed with material things. For all actions without exception culminate in wisdom, O son of Kunti.
34 Understand the true nature of that wisdom by approaching illumined souls. If you prostrate at their feet, render them service, and question them with an open and guileless heart, those wise seers of Truth will instruct you in that knowledge.
35 Arjuna, when you have reached enlightenment, ignorance will delude you no more. In the light of that Knowledge you will see the entire creation first within your own self, and then in Me (the Oversoul).
36 Even though you were the foulest of all sinners, this wisdom alone would carry you, like a raft, across all your sin.
37 For, as the blazing fire turns the fuel to ashes, Arjuna, even so the fire of wisdom turns all actions to ashes.
38 On earth there is no purifier as great as wisdom; he who has attained purity of heart through a prolonged practice of Karmayoga automatically sees the light of Truth in himself in course of time.
39 He who has mastered his senses, is exclusively devoted to his practice and is fully of faith, attains wisdom; having had the revelation of Truth, he immediately attains supreme peace (in the form of God-Realization).
40 He who lacks discrimination, is devoid of faith, and is at the same time possessed by doubt is lost to the spiritual path. For the doubting soul there is neither this world nor the world beyond, nor even happiness.
41 Arjuna, actions do not bind him who has dedicated all his actions to God according to the spirit of Karmayoga, whose doubts have been torn to shreds by wisdom, and who is self-possessed.
42 Therefore, Arjuna, slashing to pieces, with the sword of wisdom, this doubt in your heart, born of ignorance, establish your-self in Karmayoga in the shape of even temperedness, and stand up for the fight.’’
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the fourth chapter entitled ‘‘The Yoga of knowledge as well as the disciplines of Action and Knowledge’’.
