CHAPTER II - “Sankhyayoga” ( The Yoga of knowledge )

1 Sanjaya said: ‘‘Sri Krsna then addressed the following words
to Arjuna who was as mentioned before overwhelmed with pity,
whose eyes were filled with tears and agitated, and who was full of
sorrow.’’
2 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘Arjuna, how has this infatuation over-
taken you at this odd hour? It is shunned by noble souls; neither will
it bring heaven, nor fame, to you.
3 Yield not to unmanliness, Arjuna; ill does it become you.
Shaking off this paltry faintheartedness stand up, O scorcher of en-
emies.’’
4 Arjuna said: ‘‘How Krsna, shall I fight Bhisma and Drona
with arrows on the battle-field? They are worthy of deepest rever-
ence, O destroyer of foes.
5 It is better to live on alms in this world without slaying
these noble elders, because even after killing them we shall after all
enjoy only bloodstained pleasures in the form of wealth and sense-
enjoyments.
6 We do not even know which is preferable for us - to fight or
not to fight; nor do we know whether we shall win or they will con-
quer us. Those very sons of Dhrtarastra, killing whom we do not
even wish to live, stand in the enemy ranks.
7 With my very being tainted by the vice of faintheartedness
and my mind puzzled with ignorance regarding dharma, I am asking
you. Tell me that is decidedly good; I am your disciple. Pray instruct
me, who have put myself into your hands.
8 For even on obtaining undisputed sovereignty and an
affluent kingdom on this earth and lordship over the gods, I do not
see any means that can drive away the grief which is drying up my
senses.’’
9 Sanjaya said: ‘‘O king, having thus spoken to Sri Krsna,
Arjuna again said to Him, “I will not fight,” and became silent.
10 Then, O Dhrtarastra, Sri Krsna, as if smiling addressed the
following words to sorrowing Arjuna, in the midst of the two armies.’’
11 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘Arjuna, you grieve over those who
should not be grieved for and yet speak like the learned; wise men
do not sorrow over the dead or the living.
12 In fact, there was never a time when I was not, or when you
or these kings were not. Nor is it a fact that hereafter we shall all
cease to be.
13 Just as boyhood, youth and old age are attributed to the
soul through this body, even so it attains another body. The wise
man does not get deluded about this.
14 O son of Kunti, the contacts between the senses and their
objects, which give rise to the feeling of heat and cold, pleasure and
pain etc., are transitory and fleeting; therefore, Arjuna, endure them.
15 Arjuna, the wise man to whom pain and pleasure are alike,
and who is not tormented by these contacts, becomes eligible for
immortality.
16 The unreal has no existence, and the real never ceases to
be; the reality of both has thus been perceived by the seers of truth.
17 Know that alone to be imperishable, which pervades this
universe; for no one has power to destroy this indestructible sub-
stance.
18 All these bodies pertaining to the imperishable, indefin-able and eternal soul are spoken of as perishable; therefore, Arjuna, fight.
19 He who knows the soul to be capable of killing and he who takes it as killed; both these are ignorant, for verily the soul neither
kills, nor is killed.
20 The soul is never born nor dies; nor does it become onlyafter being born. For it is unborn, eternal, everlasting and ancient;
even though the body is slain, the soul is not.
21 Arjuna, the man who knows this soul to be imperishable,eternal and free from birth and decay, - how and whom will he causeto be killed, how and whom will he kill?
22 As a man shedding worn-out garments, takes other new ones, likewise the embodied soul, casting off worn out bodies, entersinto others which are new.
23 Weapons cannot cut it nor can fire burn it; water cannotwet it nor wind dry it.
24 For this soul is incapable of being cut; it is proof againstfire, not affected by water and is undriable as well. This soul is ever-lasting, omnipresent, stable, immovable, and eternal.
25 This soul is unmanifest to the senses; it is unthinkable by the mind; and it is not subject to any kind of change. Therefore,
knowing this as such, you should not grieve.
26 And, Arjuna, if you should suppose this soul to be subjectto constant birth and death, even then you should not grieve like
this.
27 For in that case death is certain for the born, and rebirth isinevitable for the dead. You should not, therefore, grieve over the
inevitable.
28 Arjuna, before birth beings are not manifest to our humansenses; at death they return to the unmanifest again. They are manifest only in the interim between birth and death. What occasion, then, for lamentation?
29 Someone perceives this soul as marvellous, another likewise speaks of it as marvellous, and yet another hears of it as marvellous; while there are some who know it not even on hearing of it.
30 Arjuna, this soul dwelling in the bodies of all can never be slain; therefore, you should not mourn for any being.
31 Besides, considering your own dharma too you should notwaver, for there is nothing more welcome for a man of the warrior class than a righteous war.
32 Arjuna, happy are the Ksatriyas who get such an unsolic-ited opportunity for war; which opens the door to heaven.
33 Now, If you refuse to fight this righteous war, then, shirkingyour own dharma and losing your reputation, you will incur sin.
34 Nay, people will also pour undying infamy on you; and in-famy brought on a man enjoying popular esteem is worse than death.
35 And the warrior-chiefs who thought highly of you, will nowdespise you, thinking that it was fear which drove you from battle.
36 And your enemies, will belittle your might, will speak manywords of ill fame; what can be more distressing than this?
37 Die, and you will win heaven; conquer, and you enjoy sov-ereignty of earth; therefore, stand up, Arjuna, determined to fight.
38 Treating alike victory and defeat, gain and loss, pleasureand pain, get ready for the fight, then; fighting thus you will not incur sin.
39 Arjuna, this attitude of mind has been presented to you fromthe point of view of Sankya; now hear the same as presented fromthe stand point of yoga. With this attitude of mind, you will be ableto throw off completely the shackles of Karma.
40 In this path (of disinterested action) there is no loss of effort, nor is there fear of contrary result, even a little practice of this dharma saves one from terrible fears.
41 Arjuna, in this Yoga (of disinterested action) the intellect isdeterminate and directed singly towards one ideal; whereas the in-tellect of the undecided (ignorant men moved by desires) wanders
in all directions, and their aims are endless.
42-44 Arjuna, those who are full of worldly desires and devoted to the letter of the Vedas, who look upon heaven, as the supreme goal and argue that there is nothing beyond heaven are unwise. They utter flowery speech recommending many rituals of various kinds for the attainment of pleasure and power with rebirth as their fruit. The minds of such carried away by attachment to pleasure and worldly power, cannot attain the determinate intellect concentrated on God.
45 Arjuna, the Vedas thus deal with the evolutes of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti, viz, worldly enjoyments and the means of attaining such enjoyments); be thou indifferent to these enjoymentsand their means, rising above pairs of opposites like pleasure andpain etc., established in the Eternal Existence (God), absolutely un-concerned about the supply of wants and the preservation of what has been already attained, and self controlled.
46 A Brahman, who has obtained enlightenment, has the same use for all the Vedas as one who stands at the brink of a sheet of water overflowing on all sides has for a small reservoir of water.
47 Your right is to work only, but never to the fruit thereof. Benot instrumental in making your actions bear fruit, nor let your at-
tachment be to inaction.
48 Arjuna, perform your duties established in Yoga, renounc-ing attachment, and even-tempered in success and failure; evennessof temper is called Yoga.
49 Action (with a selfish motive) is far inferior to this Yoga in the form of equanimity. Do you seek refuge in this equipoise of mind, Arjuna; for miserly and wretched are those who are instrumental in making their actions bear fruit.
50 Endowed with equanimity, one sheds in this life both good and evil. Therefore, strive for the practice of this Yoga of equanimity. Skill in action lies in (the practice of this) Yoga.
51 For wise men possessing an equipoised mind, renouncing the fruit of actions and freed from the shackles of birth, attain the blissful supreme state.
52 When your mind will have fully crossed the mire of delusion, you will then grow indifferent to the enjoyments of this world and the next that have been heard of as well as to those that are yet to be heard of.
53 When your intellect, confused by hearing conflicting state-ments, will rest, steady and undistracted (in meditation) on God, you will then attain Yoga (for lasting union with God).’’
54 Arjuna said: ‘‘Krsna, what is the definition (mark) of a God-realized soul, stable of mind and established in Samadhi (perfect tranquillity of mind)? How does the man of stable mind speak, how does he sit, how does he walk? ’’
55 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘Arjuna, when one thoroughly dismisses
all cravings of the mind, and is satisfied in the soul through (the joyof) the self, then he is called stable of mind.
56 The sage, whose mind remains unperturbed amid sorrows, whose thirst for pleasures has altogether disappeared, and who is free from passion, fear and anger, is called stable of mind.
57 He who is unaffectionate to anything, and meeting with good and evil, neither rejoices nor recoils, his mind is stable.
58 When like a tortoise, which draws in its limbs from all di-rections, he withdraws his senses from the sense-objects, his mind
is (should be considered as) stable.
59 Sense-objects turn away from him, who does not enjoy them with this senses; but the taste for them persists; this relish also dis-appears in the case of the man of stable mind when he sees the Supreme.
60 Turbulent by nature, the senses even of a wise man, who is practising self-control, forcibly carry away his mind, Arjuna.
61 Therefore, having controlled them all and collecting his mind one should sit for meditation, devoting oneself heart and soul to Me. For he, whose senses are mastered, is known to have a stable mind.
62 The man dwelling on sense-objects develops attachment for them; from attachment springs up desire, and from desire (unfulfilled) ensues anger.
63 From anger arises infatuation; from infatuation, confusion of memory; from confusion of memory, loss of reason; and from loss of reason one goes to complete ruin.
64 But the self-controlled Practicant, while enjoying the various sense-objects through his senses, which are disciplined and free from likes and dislikes, attains placidity of mind.
65 With the attainment of such placidity of mind, all his sorrows come to an end; and the intellect of such a person of tranquil mind soon withdrawing itself from all sides, becomes firmly established in God.
66 He who has not controlled his mind and senses can have no reason; nor can such an undisciplined man think of God. The un-thinking man can have no peace; and how can there be happiness for one lacking peace of mind?
67 As the wind carries away a boat upon the waters, even so the senses moving among sense-objects, the one to which the mind is joined takes away it's discrimination.
68 Therefore, Arjuna, he, whose senses are completely restrained from their objects, is said to have a stable mind.
69 That which is night to all beings, in that state (of Divine Knowledge and supreme Bliss) the God-realized Yogi keeps awake, and that (the ever changing, transient worldly happiness) in which all beings keep awake is night to the seer.
70 As the waters of different rivers enter the ocean; which though full on all sides remains undisturbed, likewise he in whom all enjoyments merge themselves attains peace; not he who hankers after such enjoyments.
71 He who has given up all desires, and moves free from at-tachment, egoism and thirst for enjoyments attains peace.
72 Arjuna, such is the state of the God-realized soul; having reached this state, he overcomes delusion. And established in this state, even at the last moment, he attains oneness with Brahma.’’
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the second chapter entitled “Sankhyayoga” (the Yoga of knowledge).
