CHAPTER IX - The Yoga of sovereign Science and the Sovereign secret

1 Sri Bhagavan said: “To you, who are devoid of the carping spirit, I shall now unfold the most secret of knowledge of Nirguna Brahma along with the knowledge of manifest Divinity, knowing which you shall be free from the evil of worldly existence.
2 This knowledge (of both Nirguna and saguna aspects of Divinity) is a sovereign science, a sovereign secret, supremely holy, most excellent, directly enjoyable, attended with virtue, very easy to practise and imperishable.
3 Arjuna, people having no faith in this Dharma, failing to reach Me, revolve in the path of the world of death.
4 The whole of this universe is permeated by Me as unmanifest Divinity, and all beings rest on the idea within Me. Therefore, really speaking, I am not present in them.
5 Nay, all those beings abide not in Me; but behold the won-derful power of My divine Yoga; though the Sustainer and Creator of beings, My Self in reality dwells not in those beings.
6 Just as the extensive air, which is moving everywhere, (being born of ether) ever remains in ether, likewise know that all beings (who have originated from My thought) abide in Me.
7 Arjuna, during the Final Dissolution all beings enter My Prakrti (the prime cause), and at the beginning of creation, I send them forth again.
8 Wielding My Nature I release, again and again, (according to their respective Karmas) all this multitude of beings subject to the influence of their own nature.
9 Arjuna, those actions, however, do not bind Me, unattached as I am to such actions and standing apart as it were.
10 Arjuna, with me as the supervisor, Nature brings forth the whole creation, consisting of both sentient and insentient beings; it is due to this cause that the wheel of Samsara is going round.
11 Fools, not knowing My supreme nature, disregard Me, the Overlord of the entire creation, who have put on the human sem-blance. (That is to say, they take Me, who have appeared in human garb through My Yogamaya for the deliverance of the world, for an ordinary mortal.)
12 Those bewildered persons with vain hopes, futile actions and fruitless knowledge have embraced a devil, demoniacal and delusive nature.
13 On the other hand, Arjuna, great souls who have embraced the divine nature, knowing Me as the prime source of all lives and the imperishable eternal, worship Me constantly with none else in mind.
14 Constantly chanting My names and glories and striving for My realization, and bowing again and again to Me, those devotees of firm resolve, ever united with me through meditation, worship Me with single - minded devotion.
15 Others (who follow the path of Knowledge) betake themselves to me through their offering of Knowledge, worship-ping Me (in My absolute, formless aspect) as one with themselves; while still others worship Me in My universal Form in many ways, taking Me to be diverse in diverse celestial forms.
16 I am the Vedic ritual, I am the sacrifice, I am the offering; I am the medicinal herbs; I am the sacred formula, I am the clarified butter, I am the sacred fire, and I am verily the act of offering oblations into the fire.
17 I am the sustainer and ruler of this universe, its father, mother and grandfather, the one worth knowing, the purifier, the sacred syllable OM, and the three Vedas - Rk, Yajus and Sama.
18 I am the supreme goal, supporter, lord, witness, abode, refuge, well - wisher seeking no return, origin and end, resting -place, storehouse (to which all beings return at the time of universal destruction), and imperishable seed.
19 I radiate heat as the sun, and hold back as well as send forth showers, Arjuna. I am immortality as well as death; even so I am being and non - being.
20 Those who perform action with some interested motive as laid down in these three Vedas and drink the Soma juice (Amirtham), and have thus been purged of sin, worshipping Me through sacri-fices, seek access to heaven; attaining Indra's paradise as the result or their virtuous deeds, they enjoy the celestial pleasures of gods in heaven.
21 Having enjoyed the extensive heaven - world, they return to this world of mortals on the stock of their merits being exhausted. Thus devoted to the rituals with interested motive recommended by the principles of the three Vedas (as the means of attaining heavenly bliss), and seeking worldly enjoyments, they repeatedly come and go (i.e., ascend to heaven by virtue of their merits and return to earth when their fruit has been enjoyed.)
22 The devotees, however, who loving no one else constantly think of Me, and worship Me in a disinterested spirit, to those ever united in thought with Me, I bring full security and personally attend to their needs.
23 Arjuna, even those devotees who, endowed with faith, wor-ship other gods (with some interested motive) worship Me alone, though with a mistaken approach.
24 For I am the enjoyer and also the lord of all sacrifices; but they know Me not in reality (as the supreme Deity), hence they fall.
25 Those who are vowed to gods go to the gods; those who are vowed to the manes reach the manes; those who adore the spirits reach the spirits and those who worship Me come to me alone. (That is why My devotees are no longer subject to birth and death.)
26 Whosoever offers to Me with love a leaf, a flower, a fruit of even water, I will accept it.
27 Arjuna, whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer as oblation to the sacred fire, whatever you bestow as a gift, whatever you do by way of penance, offer it all to Me.
28 With your mind thus established in the Yoga of renuncia-tion (offering of all actions to Me), you will be freed from the bonds of karma; and freed from them, you will attain Me.
29 I am equally present in all beings; there is none hateful or dear to Me. They, however, who devoutly worship Me abide in Me; and I too stand revealed in them.
30 Even if the vilest of sinner (most wicked man) worships Me with exclusive devotion, he should be accounted a saint; for he has rightly resolved. (He is positive in his belief that there is nothing like devoted worship of God.)
31 Speedily he becomes virtuous and secures lasting peace. Know it for certain, and declare, Arjuna, that My devotee never per-ishes.
32 Arjuna, women, Vaisyas, Sudras, as well as those of vile birth, whoever they may be, taking refuge in Me they too attain the supreme goal.
33 How much more, then, holy Brahmanas and royal sages devoted to Me! Therefore, having obtained this joyless and transient human life, constantly worship Me.
34 Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me and make obeisance to Me; thus having Me as the supreme goal and linking yourself with Me, you shall come to Me.”
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the ninth chapter entitled “The Yoga of sovereign Science and the Sovereign secret.”
