CHAPTER XII - The Yoga of Devotion

1 The devotees exclusively and constantly devoted to you in the manner stated just earlier, adore you as possessed of form and attributes, and those who adore as the supreme Reality only the indestructible unmanifest Brahma (who is Truth, Knowledge and Bliss solidified) - of these two types of worshippers who are the best knowers of Yoga?
2 Sri Bhagavan said: “I consider them to be the best Yogis, who endowed with supreme faith, and ever united through medita-tion with Me, worship Me with the mind centered on Me.
3 - 4 Those, however, who fully controlling all their senses and even-minded towards all, and devoted to the welfare of all beings, constantly adore as their very self the unthinkable, omnipresent, in-destructible, indefinable, eternal, immovable unmanifest and change-less Brahma, they too come to Me.
5 Of course, the strain is greater for those who have their mind attached to the Unmanifest, for atonement with the Unmanifest is attained with difficulty by those who are centered in the body.
6 - 7 On the other hand, those who depending exclusively on Me, and surrendering all actions to Me, worship constantly meditating on Me with single-minded devotion. These, Arjuna, I speedily deliver from the ocean of birth and death, their mind being fixed on Me.
8 Therefore, fix your mind on Me, and establish your intellect in Me alone; thereafter you will abide solely in me. There is no doubt about it.
9 If you cannot steadily fix the mind on Me, Arjuna, then seek to attain me through the Yoga of repeated practice.
10 If you are unequal even to the pursuit of such practice, be intent work for Me; you shall attain perfection (in the shape of My realization) even by performing actions for My sake.
11 If, taking recourse to the Yoga of My realization, you are unable even to do this, then, subduing your mind and intellect etc., relinquish the fruit of all actions.
12 Wisdom is better than practice (without discernment), medi-tation on God is superior to Wisdom, and renunciation of the fruit of actions is even superior to meditation; for peace immediately fol-lows from renunciation.
13 -14 He who is free from malice towards all beings, friendly and compassionate, rid of 'I' and 'mine', balanced in joy and sorrow, forgiving by nature, ever-contented and mentally united with Me, nay, who has subdued his mind, senses and body, has a firm resolve, and has surrendered his mind and reason to Me, - that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
15 He who is not a source of annoyance to his fellow-creatures, and who in his turn does not feel vexed with his fellow-creatures, and who is free from delight and envy, perturbation and fear, is dear to Me.
16 He who wants nothing, who is both internally and externally pure, is clever and impartial and has risen above all distractions, and who renounces the feeling of doership in all undertakings, - that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
17 He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires, and who renounces both good and evil actions and is full of devotion, is dear to me.
18 - 19 He who is alike to friend and foe, as well as to honour and ignominy, who remains balanced in heat and cold, pleasure and pain and other contrary experiences, and is free from attachment. He who takes praise and reproach alike, and is given to contemplation and contented with any means of subsistence whatsoever, entertaining no sense of ownership and attachment in respect of his dwelling-place and full of devotion to me, that man is dear to Me.
20 Those devotees, however, who partake in a disinterested way of this nectar of pious dharma set forth above, endowed with faith and solely devoted to Me, they are extremely dear to Me.”
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the Twelfth chapter entitled “The Yoga of Devotion.”
