CHAPTER X - TheYoga of Divine Glories

1 Sri Bhagavan said: “Arjuna, hear once again My supreme word, which I shall speak to you, who are so loving, out of solicitude for your welfare.

2 Neither gods nor the great sages know the secret of my birth (i.e., My appearance in human or other garb out of mere sport); for I am the prime cause in all respects of gods as well as of the great seers.

3 He who knows Me in reality as birthless and without be-ginning, and as the supreme Lord of the Universe, he, undeluded among men, is purged of all sins.

4 - 5 Reason, right knowledge, unclouded understanding, forbear-ance, veracity, control over the senses and mind, joy and sorrow, evolution and dissolution, fear and fearlessness, non-violence, equa-nimity, contentment, austerity, charity, fame and infamy, - these diverse traits of creatures emanate from Me alone.

6 The seven great seers, their four elders (Sanaka and oth-ers), and the fourteen Manus or progenitors of mankind (such as Swayambhuva and his successors), who are all devoted to Me and like me, were born of My will; from them all these creatures in the world have descended.

7 He who knows in reality this supreme divine glory and su-pernatural power of Mine gets established in Me through unfaltering devotion; of this there is no doubt.

8 I am the source of all creation and everything in the world moves because of Me; knowing thus the wise, full of devotion, con-stantly worship Me.

9 With their mind fixed on Me, and their lives surrendered to Me, enlightening one another about My greatness and speaking of Me, My devotees ever remain contented and take delight in Me.

10 On those ever united through meditation with Me and wor-shipping Me with love, I confer that Yoga of real intelligence through which they come to Me.

11 In order to shower My grace on them I, dwelling in their heart, dispel the darkness born of ignorance by the shining light of wisdom.”

12 - 13 Arjuna said: “You are the transcendent Eternal, the supreme Abode and the greatest purifier; all the seers speak of You as the eternal divine Purusa, the primal Deity, unborn and all-pervading. Likewise speak the celestial sage Narada, the sages Asita and Devala and the great sage Vyasa; and Yourself too proclaim this to me.

14 Krsna, I believe as true all that You tell me, Lord, neither demons nor gods are aware of Your manifestation (personality) through sport.

15 O Creator of beings, O Ruler of creatures, god of gods, the Lord of the Universe, O supreme Purusa, You alone know what you are by yourself.

16 Therefore, You alone can describe in full Your divine glories, whereby You stand pervading all these worlds.

17 O Master of Yoga, through what process of continuous medi-tation shall I know You? And in what particular aspect, O Lord, are You to be meditated upon by me?

18 Krsna, tell me once more in detail Your power of Yoga and Your glory; for I know no satiety in hearing Your nectar-like words.”

19 Sri Bhagavan said: “Arjuna, now I shall tell you My con-spicuous divine glories; for there is no limit to My magnitude.

20 Arjuna, I am the universal Self seated in the heart of all beings; so I alone am the beginning and middle and also the end of all beings.

21 I am Visnu among the twelve sons of Aditi, and the radiant sun among the luminaries; I am the glow of the Maruts (the forty-nine wind gods), and the moon among the stars.

22 Among the Vedas, I am the Samaveda; among the gods, I am Indra. Among the organs of perception etc., I am the mind; and I am the consciousness (life-energy) in living beings.

23 Among the (eleven) Rudras (gods of destruction), I am Siva; and among the Yaksas and Raksasas; I am the lord of riches (Kubera). Among the (eight) Vasus, I am the god of fire; and among the mountains, I am the Meru.

24 Among the priests, Arjuna, know Me to be their chief, Brhaspati. Among Warrior-chiefs, I am Skanda (the generalissimo of the gods); and among the waters, I am the ocean.

25 Among the great seers, I am the Bhrgu; among words, I am the sacred syllable OM. Among offerings, I am the offering of Japa(muttering of sacred formulas); and among the immovables, the Himalaya.

26 Among all trees, I am the Aswattha (the holy fig tree); among the celestial sages, Narada; among the Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Chitraratha, and among the Siddhas, I am the sage Kapila.

27 Among horses, know me to be the celestial horse Utchaihsrava, begotten of the churning of the ocean along with nec-tar; among mighty elephants, Airavata (Indra's elephant); and among men, the king.

28 Among the weapons, I am the thunderbolt; among cows, I am the celestial cow Kamadhenu (the cow of plenty). I am the sexual desire which leads to procreation (as enjoined by the scriptures); among serpents I am Vasuki.

29 Among Nagas, I am the Ananta; and I am Varuna, the lord of aquatic creatures. Among the manes, I am Aryama (the head of pitrs), and among rulers, I am Yama (the god of death).

30 Among the Daityas, I am (the great devotee) Prahlada; and among reckoners, I am Time. So among quadrupeds, I am the Lion; and among birds, Garuda.

31 Among purifiers, I am the wind; among warriors, I am Sri Rama. Among fishes, I am the shark; and among streams, I am the Ganges.

32 Arjuna, I am the beginning and the middle and the end of all creations. Of sciences, I am the science of the soul, or metaphys-ics; in disputants, I am the right type of reasoning.

33 Among the sounds represented by the various letters, I am “A” (the sound represented by the first letter of the Alphabet); of the different kinds of compounds in grammar, I am the copulative compound. I am verily the endless Time (the devourer of Time, God); I am the sustainer of all, having My face on all sides.

34 I am the all-destroying Death that snatches all, and the origin of all that shall be born. Among women, I am Kirti, Sri, Vak, Smrti, Medha, Dhrti and Ksama (the goddess presiding over glory, pros-perity, speech, memory, intelligence,  steadfastness and forbearance respectively).

35 Likewise among the Srutis that can be sung, I am the varietyknown as Brhatsama; while among the Vedic hymns, I am the hymn known as Gayatri. Again, among the twelve months (of the Hindu calendar), I am the month known a 'Margasirsa' (corresponding approximately to November); (and) among the seasons (successively appearing in India in course of a year) I am the vernal (spring) sea-son.

36 I am gambling among deceitful practices, and the glory of the glorious. I am the victory of the victorious, the resolve of the resolute, the goodness of the good.

37 I am Krsna among the Vrsnis, Arjuna among the sons of Pandu, Vyasa among the sages, and the sage Sukracharya among the wise.

38 I am the subduing power in rulers; I am righteousness in those who seek to conquer. Of things to be kept secret, I am the custodian in the shape of reticence (silence); and I am the wisdom of the wise.

39 Arjuna, I am even that which is the seed of all life. For there is no creature, moving of inert, which exists without Me.

40 Arjuna, there is no limit to My divine manifestation. This is only a brief description by Me of the extent of My glory.

41 Every such being as is glorious, brilliant and powerful, knowthat to be a part manifestation of My glory.

42 Or, what will you gain by knowing all this in detail, Arjuna? Suffice it to say that I stand holding this entire universe by a fraction of My Yogic Power.” Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the tenth chapter entitled “TheYoga of Divine Glo-ries.”
