CHAPTER III - "Karmayoga" ( The Yoga of action )

1 Arjuna said: ‘‘Krsna, if you consider Knowledge as superior to Action, why then do You urge me to this dreadful action, Kesava!
2 You are, as it were, puzzling my mind by these seemingly involved expressions; therefore, tell me definitely the one discipline by which I may obtain the highest good.’’
3 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘Arjuna, in this world two courses of Sadhana (spiritual discipline) have been enunciated by Me formerly. In the case of the sankhyayogi, the Sadhana proceeds along the path of Knowledge; whereas in the case of the Karmayogi, it proceeds along the path of Action.
4 Man does not attain freedom from action (culmination of the discipline of Action) without entering upon action; nor does he reach perfection (culmination of the discipline of Knowledge) merely by ceasing to act.
5 Surely none can ever remain inactive even for a moment; for everyone is helplessly driven to action by nature-born qualities.
6 He who outwardly restraining the organs of sense and action, sits mentally dwelling on the objects of senses, that man of deluded intellect is called a hypocrite.
7 On the other hand, he who controlling the organs of senseand action by the power of his will, and remaining unattached, un-dertakes the Yoga of Action through those organs, Arjuna, he ex-cels.
8 Therefore, do you perform your allotted duty; for action is superior to inaction. Desisting from action, you cannot even main-tain your body
9 Man is bound by his own action except when it is performedfor the sake of sacrifice. Therefore, Arjuna, do you efficiently per-form your duty, free from attachment, for the sake of sacrifice alone.
10 Having created mankind along with sacrifice at the beginning of creation the Creator, Brahma, said to them, “You shall prosper by this; may this yield the enjoyment you seek”.
11 Foster the gods through this (sacrifice), and let the gods be gracious to you. Each fostering other disinterestedly, you will attain the highest good.
12 Fostered by sacrifice, the gods will surely bestow on youunasked all the desired enjoyments. He who enjoys the gifts be-stowed by them, without giving them in return, is undoubtedly a thief.
13 The virtuous who partake of what is left over after sacrifice are absolved of all sins. Those sinful ones who cook for the sake of nourishing their body alone eat only sin.
14-15 All beings are evolved from food; production of food is dependent on rain; rain ensues from sacrifice, and sacrifice is rooted in prescribed action. Know that prescribed action has its origin in the Vedas, and the Vedas proceed from the Indestructible (God); hence the pervading Infinite is always present in sacrifice.
16 Arjuna, he who does not follow the wheel of creation thus set going in this world (i.e., does not perform his duties), sinful and sensual, he lives in vain.
17 He, however, who takes delight in the Soul alone and is gratified with the Soul, and is contented in the Soul, has no duty that could be done.
18 In this world that great soul has no use whatsoever for things done nor for things not done; nor has he selfish dependence of any kind on any creature.
19 Therefore, go on efficiently doing your duty without at-tachment. Doing work without attachment man attains the supreme.
20 It is through action (without attachment) alone that Janaka and other wise men reached perfection. So, having in view the need to show the right path to the world too, you should take to action.
21 For whatever a great man does, that very thing other men also do; whatever standard he sets up, the generality of men follow the same.
22 Arjuna, there is nothing in all the three worlds for Me to do, nor is there anything worth attaining unattained by me, yet I continue to work.
23 Should I not engage in action, scrupulously at any time, Arjuna, men will follow My way in all matters.
24 If I cease to act, these worlds will perish; nay, I should proveto be the cause of confusion of races, and of the destruction of these people.
25 Arjuna, as the unwise act with attachment, so should the wise man, seeking the welfare of the world order, act without at-tachment.
26 A wise man established in the mind should not unsettle the mind of the ignorant attached to action, but should get them to perform all their duties, duly perform his own duties.
27 All actions are being performed by the modes of Prakrti (qualities of nature). The fool, whose mind is deluded by egoism, thinks: ‘‘I am the doer.’’
28 He, however, who has true insight into the respective spheres of Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and their actions, holding that it is the Gunas (in the shape of the senses, mind, etc.,) that move among the Gunas (objects of perception), does not get attached to them, Arjuna.
29 Those who are completely deluded by the Gunas (modes)of Prakrti remain attached to those Gunas and actions; the man of perfect Knowledge should not unsettle the mind of those insuffi-ciently knowing fools.
30 Therefore, dedicating all actions to Me with your mind fixed on Me, the Self of all, freed from egoism and the feeling of passion and cured of mental fever, fight.
31 Even those men who, with an uncavilling and devout mind, always follow this religion (teaching) of Mine are released from the bondage of all actions.
32 They, however, who, finding fault with this religion(teaching) of Mine, do not follow it, take those fools to be deluded in the matter of all knowledge, and ruined.
33 All living creatures follow their natural tendencies; even the wise man acts according to the tendencies of his own nature. What use is any external restraint?
34 Attraction and repulsion are rooted in all sense-objects. Man should never allow himself to be swayed by them, because they are the two principal enemies standing in the way of his redemption.
35 One's own dharma, though devoid of merit, is preferable to the dharma of another well performed. Even death in the perfor-mance of one's own dharma brings blessedness; another's dharma is fraught with fear.’’
36 Arjuna said: ‘‘Now impelled by what, Krsna, does this man commit sin even involuntarily, as though driven by force? ’’
37 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘It is desire begotten of the element of Rajas, which appears as wrath; nay, it is insatiable and grossly wicked. Know this to be the enemy in this case.
38 As a flame is covered by smoke, mirror by dirt, and embryo by the amnion, so is knowledge covered by desire.
39 And, Arjuna, wisdom stands covered by this eternal enemy of the wise, known as desire, which is insatiable like fire.
40 The senses, the mind and the intellect are declaration to beits seat; screening the light of Truth through these; it (desire) de-ludes the embodied soul.
41 Therefore, Arjuna, you must first control your senses, and then kill this evil thing which obstructs Jnana (Knowledge of the Absolute or Nirguna Brahma) and Vijnana (Knowledge of Sakara Brahma or manifest Divinity).
42 The senses are said to be greater (than the body); but greater than the senses is the mind. Greater than the mind is the intellect; and what is greater than the intellect is Soul.
43 Thus, Arjuna, knowing that which is higher than the intellect and subduing the mind by reason, kill this enemy in the form of desire that is hard to overcome.’’ 
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of
Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and
Arjuna, ends the third chapter entitled “Karmayoga, or the Yoga of
action.”
