CHAPTER XVI - The Yoga of Division between the Divine and the Demoniacal properties

1 Absolute fearlessness, perfect purity of mind, constant fixity in the Yoga (of meditation for the sake of Self-realization), and even so charity (in its Sattvic form), control of the senses, sacrifice (yajnam), study of the Vedas and other sacred books, austerity, uprightness;

2 Non-violence, truthfulness, absence of anger, renunciation(self sacrifice), peace, abstaining from malicious gossip (tale bearing), compassion towards all creatures, absence of covetousness, mildness, modesty, and abstaining from frivolous pursuits (stead-fastness).

3 Sublimity, forbearance, fortitude, purity, bearing enmity to none and absence of self-esteem - these are the marks of him, who is born with the divine gifts, Arjuna.

4 Hypocrisy, arrogance, and pride, and anger, harshness and ignorance too - these are the qualities of him, who is born with de-moniac nature.

5 The divine nature has been recognized as conducive to lib-eration, and the demoniac nature as conducive to bondage. Grieve not, Arjuna, for you are born with the divine endowment.

6 There are only two types of men in this world, Arjuna, the one possessing a divine nature and the other possessing a demoniac disposition. Of these, the type possessing a divine nature has been dealt with at length; now hear from Me about the type possessing demoniac disposition.

7 Men possessing a demoniac disposition know not what is right activity and what is right abstinence from activity. They pos-sess neither purity (external or internal) nor good conduct nor even truthfulness.

8 Men possessing a demoniac disposition say this world is without any foundation, absolutely unreal and godless, brought forth by mutual union of the male and female and hence conceived in ust; what else than this?

9 Clinging to this false view these self ruined, slow-witted men of a vile disposition and terrible deed, these enemies of mankind, are born in the world for it's destruction.

10 Cherishing insatiable desires and embracing false doctrines through ignorance, these men of impure conduct (vows) function in this world, full of hypocrisy, pride and arrogance.

11 Giving themselves up to innumerable cares ending only with death, they remain devoted to the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures and are positive in their belief that this is the goal of life.

12 Held in bondage by hundreds of ties of expectation and wholly giving themselves up to lust and anger, they strive to amass by unfair means hoards of money and other objects for the enjoy-ment of sensuous pleasures.

13 They say to themselves, 'This much has been secured by me today and now I shall realize this ambition. So much wealth is already with me and yet again this shall be mine.

14 That enemy has been slain by me and I shall kill those others too. I am the lord of all, the enjoyer of all power, I am endowed with all supernatural powers, and am mighty and happy.

15 - 16 I am wealthy and from a great family, who else is like unto me? I will sacrifice, will give alms, I will make merry.' Thus blinded by ignorance, enveloped in the mesh of delusion and addicted to the enjoyment of sensuous pleasures, their mind bewildered by numer-ous thoughts, these men of a devilish disposition fall into the foulest hell.

17 Intoxicated by wealth and honour, these self-conceited and haughty (devoid of humility before elders) men worship God through nominal sacrifices for ostentation without the principles.

18 Given over to egotism, brute force, arrogance, lust and anger and calumniating others (slander), they hate Me (the inner control-ler of all) dwelling in their own bodies as well as in those of others.

19 These haters, sinful, cruel and vilest among men, I cast again and again into demoniacal wombs in this world.

20 Failing to reach Me, Arjuna, these stupid souls take many births in demoniac wombs and then verily sink down to a still lower plane.

21 Desire, anger and greed - this triple gate of hell brings about the ruination of the soul. Therefore, one should avoid all these three.

22 Freed from these three gates of hell, man works his own salvation and thereby attains the supreme goal, i.e., God.

23 Having cast aside the injunctions of the scriptures, he who acts, neither attains perfection nor supreme goal nor even happiness under the impulse of his desire.

24 Therefore, the scripture alone is your authority in deter-mining what should be done and what should not be done. Knowing this, you ought to perform only such action as is ordained by the scriptures.” Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna ends the sixteenth chapter entitled “The Yoga of Division between the Divine and the Demoniacal properties.”
