CHAPTER XVII - The Yoga of the Division of the Threefold faith

1 Arjuna said: “What is the condition of those who worship, endowed with faith, though casting aside the injunctions of the scrip-tures, Krsna? - in Sattva, Rajas or Tamas?”
2 Sri Bhagavan said: “That inborn innate faith of men is of three kinds - Sattvic, Rajasic and Tamasic. Hear it from Me.
3 The faith of all men conforms to their mental constitution, Arjuna. This man (Jiva) consists of faith; whatever the nature of his faith, he is verily that.
4 Men of a Sattvic disposition worship gods; those of a Rajasic temperament worship demigods and demons; while others, who are men of a Tamasic disposition, worship the spirits of the dead and groups of ghosts.
5 Men who practise dire penance of an arbitrary type not sanc-tioned by the scriptures, and who are full of hypocrisy and egotism and are obsessed with desire, attachment and pride of power;
6 And who emaciate (torture) the elements constituting their body as well as me, the supreme Spirit, dwelling in their body, know these senseless people to have a demoniac disposition.
7 Food also, which is agreeable to different men according to their innate disposition is of three kinds. And likewise sacrifice, penance and charity too are of three kinds each; hear their distinc-tion as follows.
8 Food which promote longevity, intelligence, vigour, health, happiness and cheerfulness, and which are sweet, bland, substantial and naturally agreeable, are dear to the Sattvic type of men.
9 Foods which are bitter, acid, salty, overhot, pungent, dry and burning, and which cause suffering, grief and sickness, are dear to the Rajasic type of men.
10 Food which is half-cooked or half-ripe, insipid, putrid, stale and polluted (left overs of others), and which is impure too, is dear to men of a Tamasic disposition.
11 The sacrifice which is offered, as ordained by scriptural injunctions, by men who expect no return and who believe that such sacrifices must be performed, (for it's own sake) is Sattvic in character.
12 That sacrifice, however which is offered for the sake of mere show or even with an eye to its fruit, know it to be Rajasic, Arjuna.
13 A sacrifice, which has no respect for scriptural injunctions, in which no food is distributed, and no sacrificial fees are paid, which is without sacred chant and devoid of faith, is said to be Tamasic.
14 Worship of the supreme Lord, the Brahmans, one's elders and wise men, purity, straightforwardness, continence and harm-lessness - this is called bodily penance.
15 Words which cause no annoyance to others and are truthful, agreeable and wholesome, as well as the study and practice of the Vedas - this is known as the austerity of speech.
16 Serenity of mind, placidity, habit of contemplation on God, self control and perfect purity of inner feelings - all this is called austerity of the mind.
17 This threefold penance performed with supreme faith by men expecting no return is called Sattvic.
18 The penance which is performed for the sake of renown, honour and reverence as well as for any other selfish gain by way of ostentation, and yields an uncertain and momentary fruit, has been spoken of here as Rajasic.
19 Austerity which is practised through perversity and is ac-companied with self-mortification or is intended to harm others, such austerity has been declared as Tamasic.
20 A gift which is bestowed with a sense of duty on one who is no benefactor when a fit place, suitable time and a deserving person  are available, that gift has been pronounced as Sattvic.
21 A gift which is bestowed in a grudging spirit and with the object of getting a service in return or in the hope of obtaining a reward, is called Rajasic.
22 A gift which is made without good grace and in a disdainful spirit out of time and place and to undeserving persons, is said to be Tamasic.
23 OM, TAT, and SAT - this has been declared as the threefold appellation of the Absolute, who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss solidified. By that were the Brahmans and the Vedas as well as sacrifices created at the cosmic dawn.
24 Therefore, acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity as enjoined by sacred precepts are always commenced by noble souls given to the recitation of Vedic chants with utterance of the divine name OM.
25 With the idea that all this belongs to God, who is denoted by the appellation TAT, acts of sacrifice and austerity as well as acts of charity of various kinds are performed by the seekers of blessed-ness, liberation expecting no return for them.
26 The name of God, SAT, is employed in the sense of reality and goodness. And the word SAT is also used in auspicious acts, Arjuna.
27 And steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and charity is like-wise spoken of as SAT and action for the sake of God is verily termed as SAT.
28 An oblation which is offered, a gift given, and austerity practised, and whatever good deed is performed, without faith, it is all termed as naught (ASAT); therefore, it is of no avail here or hereafter.”
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the seventeenth chapter entitled “The Yoga of the Division of the Threefold faith”.
