CHAPTER V - The Yoga of Action and Knowledge

1 Arjuna said: ‘‘Krsna, you extol Sankhyayoga ( the yoga ofrenunciation) and then the Yoga of action. Pray tell me which of the two is decidedly conducive to my good.’’
2 Sri Bhagavan said: ‘‘The Yoga of renunciation and Yoga of
Action both lead to supreme Bliss. Of the two, however, the Yoga of Action is superior to the Yoga of Knowledge.
3 The Karmayogi who neither hates nor desires should be ever considered a renouncer. For, Arjuna, he who is free from the pairs of opposites is easily freed from bondage.
4 It is the ignorant, not the wise, who say that Sankhyayoga and Karmayoga lead to divergent results. For one who is firmly es-tablished in either gets the fruit of both (which is the same, viz., God - Realization).
5 The (Supreme) state which is reached by the Sankhyayogi is attained also by the Karmayogi. Therefore, he alone who sees
Sankhyayoga and Karmayoga as one (so far as their result goes)really sees.
6 Without Karmayoga, however, Sankhyayoga (or renuncia-tion of doership is relation to all activities of the mind, senses and body) is difficult to accomplish; whereas the Karmayogi, who keeps his mind fixed on God, reaches Brahma in no time, Arjuna.
7 The Karmayogi who has fully conquered his senses, whose heart is pure, and who has indentified himself with the inner Self of all beings (viz., God), remains untainted, even though performing action.
8 - 9 The Sankhyayogi, however, who knows the reality of things, must believe, even though seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating or drinking, walking, sleeping, breathing, speaking, answering the calls of nature, grasping, and opening or closing the eyes, that he does nothing, holding that it is the senses that are moving among their objects.
10 He who acts offering all actions to God, and shaking off attachment, remains untouched by sin, as the lotus leaf by water.
11 The Karmayogis perform action only with their senses, mind, intellect and body as well, withdrawing the feeling of 'mine'
in respect of them and shaking off attachment, simply for the sake of self-purification.
12 Offering the fruit of actions to God, the yogi attains ever-lasting peace in the shape of God - Realization, whereas, he who
works with a selfish motive, being attached to the fruit of actions through desire, gets tied down.
13 The self-controlled Sankhyayogi, doing nothing himself and getting nothing done by others, rests happily in God, (the embodi-
ment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss), mentally relegating all ac-tions to the mansion of nine gates (the body with nine openings).
14 God makes not the agencies nor the actions of the people, nor even their contact with the fruit of actions; but it is Nature alone that functions.
15 The omnipresent God does not receive the virtue or sin of anyone. Wisdom is enveloped in ignorance; hence it is that beings are constantly falling a prey to delusion.
16 In the case, however, of those whose said ignorance has been set aside by true Knowledge of God, that wisdom shining like
the sun reveals the supreme.
17 Those whose mind and intellect are wholly merged in Him, who remain constantly established in identity with Him, and have finally become one with Him, their sins being wiped out by wis-dom, reach the state whence there is no return.
 18 The wise look with the same eye on a Brahman endowed with learning and culture, a cow, and elephant, dog, and a pariah too.
19 Even here is the mortal plane conquered by those whose mind is established in equality just as the Absolute (Supreme) is untouched by evil and knows no distinction, hence they are already established in the Eternal.
20 He who, with reason firm and free from doubt, rejoices not on obtaining what is pleasant and does not feel perturbed on meeting with the unpleasant, that knower of Brahma lives eternally in identity with Brahma.
21 He whose mind remains unattached to sense-objects, derives through meditation the Sattvic joy which dwells in the mind; then that Yogi, having completely identified himself through meditation with Brahma, enjoys eternal Bliss.
22 The pleasures which are born of sense-contacts are verily a source of suffering only (though appearing as enjoyable to worldly-minded people). They have a beginning and an end (they come and go). Arjuna, it is for this reason that a wise man does not indulge in them.
23 He alone who is able to stand, in this very life before cast-ing off this body, the urges of lust and anger is a Yogi; and he alone is a happy man.
24 He who is happy within himself, enjoys within himself the delight of the soul, and even so is illumined by the inner light (light of the soul), such a Yogi (Sankhyayogi) indentified with Brahma attains Brahma, who is all peace.
25 The seers whose sins have been wiped out, whose doubts have been dispelled by knowledge, whose disciplined mind is firmly established in God and who are actively engaged in the service of all beings, attain Brahma, who is all peace.
26 To those wise men who are free from lust and anger, who have subdued their mind and have realized God, Brahma, the abode of eternal peace, is present all round.
27 - 28 Shutting out all thoughts of external enjoyments, with the gaze fixed on the space between the eye-brows, having regulated the Prana (outgoing) and the Apana (ingoing) breaths flowing within the nostrils, he who has brought his senses, mind and intellect undercontrol, - such a contemplative soul intent on liberation and free from desire, fear and anger, is ever liberated.
29 Having known Me in reality as the enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities, the supreme Lord of all the worlds, and the disinter-ested friend of all beings, My devotee attains peace.’’
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the fifth chapter entitled “The Yoga of Action and Knowledge”.
