CHAPTER XVIII - The Yoga of Liberation through the Path of Knowledge and Self - Surrender

1 Arjuna said: “O mighty armed Sri Krsna, O inner controller of all, O Slayer of Kesi, I wish to know separately the truth of Sannyasa and Tyaga.”
2 Sri Bhagavan said: “Some sages understand Sannyasa as the giving up of all actions motivated by desire; and other thinkers declare that Tyaga consists in relinquishing the fruit of all actions.
3 Some wise men declare that all actions contain a measure of evil, and therefore should be given up; while others say that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not worth shunning.
4 Of Sannyasa and Tyaga, first hear My conclusion on the subject of Tyaga, Arjuna; for Tyaga, O tiger among men, has been declared, to be of three kinds - (Sattvic, Rajasic and Tamasic).
5 Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not worth giving up; they must be performed. For sacrifice, charity and penance - all these are purifiers of wise men.
6 Hence these acts of sacrifice, charity and penance, and all other acts too, must be performed without attachment and hope of reward; this is My sure and supreme verdict, Arjuna.
7 (Prohibited acts and those that are motivated by desire should no doubt be given up). But it is not advisable to abandon a prescribed duty. Its abandonment through ignorance has been declared as Tamasic.
8 Should anyone give up his duties for fear of physical strain, thinking that all actions are verily of the nature of discomfort, - prac-tising such Rajasic form of renunciation, he reaps not the fruit of renunciation.
9 A prescribed duty which is performed simply because it has to be performed, giving up attachment and fruit, that alone has been recognized as the Sattvic form of renunciation.
10 He who shrinks not from action which does not bring lasting happiness, nor gets attached to that which is conductive to blessed-ness, - imbued with the quality of goodness, he has all his doubts resolved, is intelligent and a man of true renunciation.
11 Since all actions cannot be given up in their entirety by anyone possessing a body, he alone who renounces the fruit of actions is called a man of renunciation.
12 Welcome, unwelcome and mixed - threefold, indeed, is the fruit that accrues hereafter from the actions of the unrenouncing. But there is none ever for those who have renounced.
13 In the branch of learning known by the name of Sankhya, which prescribes means for neutralizing all actions, these five factors have been mentioned as contributory to the accomplishment of all actions; know them from Me, Arjuna.
 14 The following are the factors operating towards the accom-plishment of actions, viz., the seat of action and the agent, the various senses and the various and different functions; and the fifth is God.
15 These five are the contributory causes of whatever actions, right or wrong, man performs with the mind, speech and body.
16 Notwithstanding this, however, he who, having an impure mind, regards the absolute, taintless Self alone as the doer, that man of perverse understanding does not view aright.
17 He whose mind is free from the sense of doership, and whose reason is not tainted by worldly objects and activities, does not really slay, even having slaughtered all these creatures, nor is bound by sin.
18 The knower, knowledge and the object of knowledge - these three motivate action. Even so the doer, the organs and activity - these are the three constituents of action.
19 In the branch of knowledge dealing with the Gunas or modes of Prakrti, knowledge and action as will as the doer have been de-clared to be of three kinds according to the Guna which predomi-nates in each; hear them too duly from Me.
20 That by which man perceives one imperishable divine ex-istence as undivided and equally present in all individual beings, know that knowledge to be Sattvic.
21 That, however, by which man cognizes many existences of various kinds as apart from one another in all beings, know that knowledge to be Rajasic.
22 Again, that knowledge which clings to one body as if it were the whole, and which is irrational, has no real object and is trivial, has been declared as Tamasic.
23 That action which is ordained by the scriptures and is not accompanied by the sense of doership, and has been done without any partiality or prejudice by one who seeks no return, is called Sattvic.
24 That action however, which involves much strain and is performed by one who seeks enjoyments or by a man full of ego-tism, has been spoken of as Rajasic.
25 That action which is undertaken through sheer delusion, without considering the consequences, loss to oneself, injury to others and one's own capacity, is declared as Tamasic.
26 Free from attachment, unegotistic, endowed with firmness and vigour and unswayed by success and failure - such a doer is said to be Sattvic.
27 The doer who is full of attachment, seeks the fruit of actions and is greedy, and who is oppressive by nature and of impure con-duct, and is affected by joy and sorrow, has been called Rajasic.
28 Lacking piety and self-control, uncultured, arrogant, de-ceitful, inclined to rob others of their livelihood, slothful, down-hearted and procrastinating, such a doer is called Tamasic.
29 Now hear, Arjuna, the threefold division, based on the pre-dominance of each Guna, of Buddhi and Dhrti also, which is being told by Me in full one by one.
30 The intellect which correctly determines the paths of activity and renunciation, what ought to be done and what should not be done, what is fear and what is fearlessness, and what is bondage and what is liberation, that intellect is Sattvic.
31 The intellect by which man does not truly perceive what is Dharma and what is Adharma, what ought to by done and what should not be done, - that intellect is Rajasic.
32 The intellect which imagines even Adharma to be Dharma and sees all other things upside - down, wrapped in darkness, that intellect is Tamasic, Arjuna.
33 The unwavering firmness by which man controls through the Yoga of meditation the functions of the mind, the vital airs and the senses - that firmness, Arjuna, is Sattvic.
34 The firmness, however, by which the man seeking a re-ward for his actions clutches with extreme fondness virtues, earthly possessions and worldly enjoyments - that firmness is Rajasic, Arjuna.
35 The firmness by which an evil - minded person refuses to shake off clinging to sleep, fear, anxiety, sorrow and vanity as well, that firmness is Tamasic.
36 - 37 Now hear from Me the threefold joy too. That in which the striver finds enjoyments through practice, meditation and service to God and whereby he reaches the end of sorrow - such a joy, though appearing as poison in the beginning, tastes like nectar in the end; hence that joy, born as it is off the placidity of mind brought about by meditation on God, has been declared as Sattvic.
38 The delight which follows from the contact of the senses with their objects is eventually poison-like, though appearing at first as nectar; hence it has been spoken of as Rajasic.
39 That which stupefies the self during its enjoyment as well as in the end - derived from sleep, indolence and obstinate error, such delight has been called Tamasic.
40 There is no being on earth or in the middle region or even among the gods or anywhere else, which is free from these three Gunas born of Prakrti.
41 The duties of the Brahmans, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas, as well as of the Sudras have been divided according to their inborn qualities, Arjuna.
42 Subjugation of the mind and senses, austerity, external and internal purity, forgiving the faults of others, straightness of mind, senses and behaviour, belief in the Vedas and other scriptures, God and life after death, Gnana (Knowledge regarding unmanifest),Vijgnana (Knowledge regarding manifest divinity) - all these con-stitute the natural duties of a Brahman. 
43 Exhibition of valour, brilliance, firmness, dexterity and not fleeing in battle, generosity, and lordliness - all these constitute the natural duty of a Ksatriya.
44 Agriculture, rearing of cows and exchange of merchandise- these constitute the natural duty of a Vaisya (a member of the trading class). And service to others is the natural duty even of a Sudra (a member of the labouring class).
45 Keenly devoted to his own natural duty, man attains the highest perfection in the shape of God - realization. Hear the mode of performance whereby the man engaged in his inborn duty reaches that highest consummation.
46 Man attains the highest perfection by worshipping through his own natural duties Him, from whom the tide of creation has streamed forth and by whom all this universe is pervaded.
47 Better in one's own duty (svadharma), though devoid of merit, than the duty of another well - performed; for performing the duty ordained by his own nature man does not incur sin.
48 Therefore, Arjuna, one should not abandon one's innate duty, even though it may be tainted with blemish; for even as fire is envel-oped in smoke, all undertakings are clouded with demerit.
49 He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, whose thirst for enjoyment has altogether disappeared and who has subdued his mind, reaches through renunciation supreme actionlessness state.
50 Arjuna, know from Me only briefly the process through which man having attained actionlessness, which is the highest con-summation of Jnanayoga (the path of Knowledge), reaches Brahma.
51 - 52 - 53Endowed with an untarnished intellect and partaking of a light, Sattvic and regulated diet, living in a lonely and undefiled place, having rejected sound and other objects of sense, having con-trolled the mind, speech and body through firmness of a Sattvic type, taking resolute stand on dispassion, after having completely got rid of attraction and aversion and remaining ever devoted to the Yoga of meditation, having given up egotism, violence, arrogance, lust, anger and luxuries, devoid of the feeling of 'I', 'Me' and 'Myself', and tranquil of heart - such a man becomes qualified for oneness with Brahma, (who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss).
54 Established in identity with Brahma (who is Truth, Con-sciousness and Bliss solidified), the serene minded no longer grieves nor craves for anything. The same to all beings, such a Yogi attains supreme devotion to Me.
55 Through that supreme devotion he comes to know Me in reality, what and how great I am; and thereby knowing Me in es-sence he forthwith enters into My being.
56 Performing all actions continually, he who depends on Me, attains by My grace the eternal, imperishable state, even though per-forming all actions.
57 Mentally resigning all your duties to Me, and taking recourse to yoga in the form of even - mindedness, be solely devoted to Me and constantly give your mind to Me.
58 With your mind thus given to Me, you shall tide over all difficulties by My grace. And if, from egotism, you will not listen, you will be lost.
59 If, taking your stand on egotism, you think, “I will not fight”, vain is this resolve of yours; nature will drive you to the act.
60 That action too which you are you willing to undertake through delusion, - bound by your own duty born of your nature, you will helplessly perform.
61 Arjuna, God abides in the heart of all creatures, causing them to revolve according to their Karma by His illusive power, seated as those beings are in the vehicle of the body.
62 Take shelter in Him alone with all your being, Arjuna. By His mere grace you shall attain supreme peace and the eternal state.
63 Thus has this wisdom, more secret than secrecy itself, been imparted to you by Me. Full pondering it, do as you like.
 64 Hear, again, My supremely secret word, the most esoteric of all truths, you are extremely dear to Me; therefore, I shall offer hou this salutary advice.
65 Give your mind to Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me and bow to Me. Doing so you will come to Me alone, I truly promise you; for you are exceptionally dear to Me.
66 Resigning all dharmas (religion), take refuge in Me alone, I shall absolve you of all sins, worry not.
67 This secret gospel of the Gita should never be imparted to a man who lacks penance, nor to him who is wanting in devotion, not even to him who lends not a willing ear; and in no case to him who finds fault with Me.
68 He who, offering the highest love to Me, preaches the most profound gospel of the Gita among My devotees, shall come to Me alone; there is no doubt about it.
69 Among men there is none who does Me more loving service than he; nor shall anyone be dearer to Me on the entire globe than he.
70 Whosoever studies this sacred dialogue of ours in the form of the Gita, by whom too shall I be worshipped through wisdom - sacrifice; such is My conviction.
71 The man who hears the holy Gita with reverence and in an uncarping spirit, - liberated (from sin), he too shall reach the happy worlds of the virtuous.
72 Have you heard this gospel of the Gita with concentrated mind, Arjuna? And has your delusion born of ignorance melted away, O conqueror of riches?”
73 Arjuna said: “Krsna, by Your grace my delusion has fled and wisdom has been gained by me. I stand shorn of all doubts. I will do your bidding.”
74 Sanjaya said: “Thus I heard the mysterious and thrilling conversation between Sri Krsna and the high souled Arjuna, son of Kunti.
75 Having been blessed with the divine vision by the grace of Sri Vyasa, I heard this supremely esoteric gospel from the Lord of Yoga, Sri Krsna Himself, imparting it to Arjuna before my very eyes.
76 Remembering, over and over, that sacred and mystic con-versation between Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Arjuna, O King, I re-joice again and yet again.
77 Remembering also, again and again, that most wonderful Form of Hari, great is my wonder and I rejoice over and over again.
78 Wherever there is Bhagavan Sri Krsna the Lord of Yoga, and wherever there is Arjuna, the wielder of the Gandiva bow, good-ness, victory, glory and unfailing righteousness are there: such is my conviction.
Thus, in the Upanisad sung by the Lord, the Science of Brahma, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna, ends the eighteenth chapter entitled ‘‘The Yoga of Libera-tion through the Path of Knowledge and Self - Surrender’’.
Om Tat Sat
